The conception behind minimum wage laws - and any similar notion that supposes that employees should receive payment or benefits unrelated to the transactional value which they bring to their employers - is economically unsound.

Though a majority of people would disagree with this point, it is at least well understood by most libertarian and anarchist thinkers, as well as by any one who has ever run a business.

What is not widely understood, even by most Christian libertarians, is that this economically unsound principle is also grossly incorrect from a theological perspective, and that there is a cultural feedback loop between "minimum wage thinking" and destructive theologies of salvation and grace.

This cultural feedback loop perverts our sense of the intersection between the natural economic order and the economy of salvation, and inverts our sense of the individual's place in relationship to other individuals, the community, and God.

Central to the philosophical blind-spot allowing this cultural feedback loop to go unnoticed even by people with otherwise sound judgement in both economics and theology is a mischaracterization of minimum wage principles as somehow communitarian or socialist, in opposition to a more individualistic paradigm favored by most libertarian thinkers, when, in fact, the exact opposite is the case.

That is, a transactional paradigm of the employee-employer relationship is not only more economically sound, it is also more communitarian in its essence. On the other hand, the so-called "socialist" minimum wage paradigm is really a disguised version of the modern sin of individualism, a heresy which, paradoxically, reduces the ultimate value of the individual to precisely zero.

This essay will give a brief overview of the economic unsoundness of "minimum wage thinking" (for the benefit of the unconvinced) and then explore how this way of thinking has polluted our shared "embedded theology" of salvation. Finally, I will show that God's free gift of grace, like all relational interactions, is essentially transactional and that this transaction, rightly understood, does not reduce grace to the status of a commodity but rather exalts the human individual as the most valued creation in the eyes of God.

Firstly, with regards to Minimum Wage as a social construct, it must be said that there are, primarily, two ideas which contribute to the notion that instituting a society-wide minimum wage is beneficial or moral. The original impetus for minimum wage policies grew out of a larger framework of society-planning philosophies which stated that governments could, and should, institute policies which would shape the whole of society toward some desired end. While both deeply immoral and largely ineffective, it was at least somewhat reasonable to have thought (at that time) that this sort of thing was the rightful domain of democratically governments. However, as the rhetoric and spirit of the political left has turned away from social engineering and towards social justice, a second justification for minimum wage policies has developed.

This newer (and now, completely accepted) idea is simply that people *deserve* to be paid some amount, and no less. In this conception, there is some specific and knowable dollar amount associated with an hour of a human being's life. Paying somebody less than that amount is not just bad for society (for whatever reason), it is fraud and exploitation of an individual person. Since justice is concerned with giving people what they rightly deserve (as Aquinas defines, in part), and since people deserve some specific amount of money, the act of not paying people that amount of money is an injustice.

The core idea here - that a person's time must be worth some specific amount of money and no less, for the reason simply that they "deserve it" - I refer to as "Minimum Wage Thinking." While minimum wage policies are equally harmful, regardless of the reason they are created, and, while the society-planning impulse carries its own problems, I am here concerned primarily with this Minimum Wage Thinking, and the way this idea, which has now become the central theme of leftist labor ideology, negatively impacts our culture's embedded theology.

It shouldn't have to be said that the general effect of instituting a minimum wage is the exclusion from the marketplace of those whose labor falls below the value of that minimum wage. The main reason for this, of course, is that a declaration of what any individual person deserves - even if it is accepted and believed by all people - has very little impact on transactional monetary value. Even the most benevolent businesses do not set wages for their employees based on their intrinsic worth, but rather based on the monetary value that each employee brings to the organization (and, on average, the pay needs to be *less* than the value received, otherwise the business runs at a loss).

This exclusion, though hotly contested by proponents of minimum wage policies, can be seen in the disappearance of most forms of extremely-low-skill service labor such as baggers at grocery stores and table bussers at restaurants. And the fact that middle-class liberals are, in practice, unconvinced by their own arguments regarding the inelasticity of the "supply" of jobs is evidenced by an almost complete absence of domestic labor in modern life.

Naturally, this exclusion carries economic burdens for the most vulnerable members of our society: women, youth, immigrants, and the uneducated. But what about the spiritual and theological burden? And what about those who manage to actually get hired in jobs that pay minimum wage?


